Forget looking to the stars in search of strange alien lifeforms, it's our own planet's deep ocean that's offering up the chance to find new life, but not as we know it. Now, when we talk about the deep ocean, we generally mean the point at which light starts to decrease rapidly, which is typically
about 200 metres and below. At depths of over 1000 metres, the ocean becomes completely dark. Combine this with near freezing temperatures and extreme pressure, it's no wonder that for a long time, scientists believed that life in the ocean's depths was impossible. However, we now understand that the deep ocean is a rich ecosystem of marine life. In a recent study, scientists discovered more than 5,000 new species living on the seabed in the Clarion Clipperton Zone (CCZ) a large stretch of seafloor between Hawaii and Mexico.

What surprised me most about our study is the level of undescribed biodeversity in the area. We found 90% of the species from the region are new to science. A particular favourite animals of mine from the CCZ are the Glass Sponges. They have stalks which are literally made of glass and that they form on the sea floor in these very low temperatures, which is really an incredile feat of physics.

This work is so pressing because the CCZ is an area that has been earmarked for deep sea mining, and the current deadline to the pause on deep sea mining is due to come to an end in July. This makes it particularly important for us to try and characterise and understand the biodiversity of the region 
because we don't understand what the impacts may be, if we don't know what biodiversity is there in the first place.

There are thought to be up to two million species living in the oceans, with some estimates putting the figure higher. So far we know about fewer than 250,000, according to the World Register of Marine Species.

It's a very exciting time to be starting to build up a picture of the biodiversity and ecology of the deep ocean, as well as understanding what that can tell us about evolution of life on this planet.