Can you move out of the way, though? You gotta move over here, sir. OK, thank you. Hey.
How you guys doing, huh?
Today we're going to be introducing our two new muntjac, Tyler and Peanut, to Chowlie.
Muntjac are a small Asian species. What I like about them is, they like to hide, and they're very, very sneaky. They actually were introduced also, in England, and they're kind of a nuisance in England. I just find it very interesting that an animal from Asia was introduced into an area where they're not supposed to be. They're also called barking deer. That's how they communicate with each other and warn each other of any kind of danger, which I think is kind of cool.
Here you go, Chowlie girl.
Chowlie, she's going to be kind of like the grandma of the bunch. She's an older female, but she's experienced out there. So I see her really kind of taking the leadership role.
There's such a cute animal. Everybody thinks they're babies, they are not. Tyler and Peanut are still doing a little bit of growing, but for the most part, they are a very small deer species. They're a year and two years old. And they're just really fun. Everyone loves Chowlie, so these two are just going to be a great addition to our area.
This is our little makeshift wall that we use a lot of times, when we're doing introductions with hoofstock. And it's solid, so the deer can see it. The tough thing about muntjac, is they get wound up really easy. I mean, they can overheat really quickly. It's actually pretty frustrating, because sometimes you're like, just calm down, it's not that big a deal. And it's really a small hoofstock, a small ungulate thing. These guys are food, so if there is aggression, and we get some chasing and stuff like that, we can quickly try to time that and separate them, and stop that aggression if that happens. Let's get two more sheets.
Hi, cute deer.
So I've been at the zoo about 24 years. And one of the things I love is, I really look at what animals behaviors are.
Excuse me. Can we talk some more?
I try very hard not to analyze them and put my own impressions on them, but it's kind of hard not to.
Hey. We've been talking all night long. This is my formal greeting, I am Tyler.
It's just-- it geeks me out.
Easy.
I got it.
You're all right.
I think, yeah. I think they'll be excited to be outside.
All right, good luck.
OK, ready?
We open the crates, and as soon as we get them open, they, of course, jump out and go pretty quickly. They think they kind of realize, oh, we're outside, you know. So then I think it kind of calms down once they're out of the crate.
I like this tree, it's very delicious. Quick, look at all these grass.
Where is Chowlie?
Hope she gets up investigates.
Oh, there she is, OK.
Chowlie's still laying down, not caring about anything.
Chowlie is just laying down right now, so she hasn't really gotten up. I'm sure she notices something's going on, because obviously, us coming in with crates is not her norm. But right now, she's calm, she's laying down, while they're kind of investigating their area.
So you have some friends.
Yeah.
I think everything went well. Hopefully those two will interact through the lattice, and we'll see what they do, and we'll continue tomorrow.