The barn owl is unquestionably a beautiful bird. It has a distinctive heart-shaped face, mottled brown and grey wings with pure white underparts. They have a wingspan of around 80-95 cm and weigh in at 250-350g. It is considered to be one of Britain's most popular birds and one of the more commonly seen owls due to its readiness to hunt during the day, although dusk is probably the best time to see one. They are silent hunters, tiny serrations on the leading edges of their flight feathers and a hairlike fringe on the trailing edges help to break up the flow of air over the wings and this reduces turbulence and the noise it would cause. The barn owl flies slowly while hunting and will hover over spots where prey might be hiding. The barn owl has fantastic hearing with asymmetrical ears which improves the owl's ability to pinpoint the position and distance of sounds. Their heart-shaped face also aids the owl's ability to hear. It's been shown that if the ruff feathers are removed, the owl can still determine the sounds position, but not its height. Barn owls' main source of prey are rodents and other small mammals, in fact, over 90% of an owl's diet is made up of such animals. But it will also prey upon other birds, lizards, amphibians, fish, spiders, and insects. The barn owl has a high metabolic rate, more so than most other owls of a similar size. This means it requires relatively more food. Observations have shown that the barn owl will eat around 14% of its own body weight of rodents per night. It may also store excess food at roosting sites which it will return to if food is scarce. Their high rate of rodent kills makes them very valuable to farmers who wish to keep the rodent population down. Barn owls are said to be more effective than poison for rodent control. As their name suggests, barn owls will nest in cavities of barns and old buildings as well as hollows of trees. Nests are built on top of the previous year's nests. There is no set breeding season for these owls, and this largely depends on the available food supply, but most commonly occurs between March and August. Around 4-6 eggs will be laid and up to 2 broods will be raised in a year. Barn owls are fairly common and be seen all over Britain and Ireland, although populations are under threat in Northern Ireland. They did go through a dramatic population decline all over Britain during the 1950s and 60s, dipping down to as low as 4000 breeding pairs. This was most likely due to the use of toxic farm chemicals such as DDT, but also loss of hunting habitat, and two particularly harsh winters of 1946/47 and 1962/63. Barn owls can also be susceptible to poisoning by ingesting rodents killed by rodenticides. Nesting sites are also scarce due to many old barns and buildings being demolished or renovated. Luckily, population numbers are thought to be on the rise due to improved conservation efforts and many nest boxes being built. These nest boxes have also allowed populations of owls to inhabit areas that they previously were absent from, such as the fens. Although it seems the population is fairly healthy, having increased to around 14,000 breeding pairs, it is acknowledged that monitoring of nocturnal birds is difficult and population studies are somewhat unreliable. Barn owls have a typical lifespan of around 4 years, typically breeding at 1 year. However, the oldest confirmed age by the British Trust for Ornithology, was 15 years, 3 months, and 21 days. The barn owl is clearly a beautiful bird, easy on the eyes you might say, but not so easy on the ears. Other names for this bird include 'screech owl, and 'demon owl' which might give you some idea as to what they sound like! But this is the 'beautiful birds' series, not 'beautiful sounding birds' series, so its place is well deserved. Thank you for watching this month's video, I hope you enjoyed that one. Please do leave a like if you did, and make sure you subscribe for more videos like this one. I hope to see you back here for the next video, until then, have a great day and I'll see you soon. Goodbye.